# Assessing Nutritional Knowledge In A NCAA Division 1 Program

**Internal Advisor:** Grace Eversaul
**External Advisor:** Joseph Gatewood
**Internship Location:** Northern Arizona University

### Abstract

For success in college sports especially as competitive as division 1 athletics, training and nutrition go hand in hand. However, many programs don’t take proper nutrition as seriously as the training. Besides general guidelines to eat healthy, college programs differ in how they choose to feed their athletes or the resources that they provide them with. Northern Arizona University’s sports nutrition program is innovative compared to other d1 schools, and my project will consist of me interning for their sports dietitian. My goal for this project is to assess the degree to which the athletes care about their nutrition. NAU is a perfect choice for my internship because they have had differing levels of success in sports and have continually made efforts to grow as a sports program, such as their recently built high performance center. I’m expecting to see different levels of knowledge and interest among sports depending on the classes students take (such as nutrition majors), and possibly, also how successful they are in their sports. With how much false information about proper nutrition there is, especially in athletics, it’s very important for high performing athletes to be focused on what they need and know how to get it. My goals with this project is to see how important athletes take nutrition at NAU while furthering my knowledge of dietetics.

## Sports Nutrition At NAU
Diego H - **February 21, 2024 9:50 am**

Hi everyone, my name is Diego Hernandez, I’ve been at Basis for 7 years and for my senior project I will be interning for NAU’s sports dietitian at their student athlete high performance center. Since my involvement in distance running I’ve gotten interested in nutrition and how important proper balance is to athletes. After high school I want to become a dietitian myself to further help athletes or anyone else who has questions about their diet. My project will consist of 3 days out of the week helping around the center while also learning about sports nutrition principles every Friday and helping out with a nutrition project involving making recipes for different athletic needs. At the same time, towards the end of my project I will be working with my internal advisor, Grace Eversaul, to make a nutrition lesson that we’ll co-teach in her P.E. class. I am the only high schooler interning among a group of NAU students, so I won’t know as much as everyone else but I still plan on learning what I can during my time. My goals for this project is to get an early start for what my college experience will be like, to become a dietitian, students need to get a masters in dietetics and before that take an internship of some sort. During college one day I will de doing an internship like this again so getting experience in high school will help me greatly. Another goal is to see what being a dietitian means in a university setting and the relationship between a sports nutritionist and athletes in a time where there is a lot of false information regarding nutrition. Overall, I want to get what I need to become a good dietitian one day and this internship will help me in starting, I’m thankful for the opportunity I was given considering I’m not an NAU student and I hope to learn a lot with my time at the center.

proposal link:

**SENIOR PROJECT PROPOSAL LINK (DEADLINK)**

https://docs.google.com/file/d/1DD9VXWW4RIZW039OiRV3Fr2BgVWI0Jsp/edit?usp=docslist_api&filetype=msword

my external advisor

https://nauathletics.com/staff-directory/joey-gatewood/373

---

## What’s Coming Feb26th-Mar1st
Diego H - **February 28, 2024 9:36 am**

This week is going to be a mix of things, a bit of catching up because I couldn’t intern last week, and also work on Carbohydrates and how they apply to exercise. There’s also going to be a study in the physiology of exercise. I’ve been doing my own reading about it to be caught up and there’s a lot I’ve learned already. Some standouts was how carb loading, something very popular in the running community, isn’t really needed for activity under about two hours. Also loading the night before isn’t as helpful as steadily increasing carb intake through the whole week leading up to competition. Some other topics we’ll be covering is overtraining and overreaching and how they’re harmful but very common in college athletics. Overtraining is pretty self explanatory but it’s when an athletes week after week is putting in too much work and not enough rest to be performing hard efforts well, this is seen heavily in injured athletes wanting to return to sports. It is also seen widespread in college sports, most teams train their athletes pretty hard and without proper care it can lead to injuries or just bad performances come a competition. Overreaching is a bit different, it’s more hard training but in a shorter period such as a week. This is more acceptable and even helpful because an athletes can train or “reach” hard for a week and then get adequate rest the following week. An example could be two weeks out from a big competition the training gets hard but then the week of said competition, they take it easy to be ready for that big game or race. I’m pretty excited to be back to my internship, I took a small pause due to being sick but I also started earlier so I’ve already gotten work in. I expect the athletic center to be more full this week since the track team doesn’t have a big meet.

---

## March 4th-8th
Diego H - **March 6, 2024 9:41 am**

Back at it, last week was pretty good, I was able to get back to interning pretty smoothly, honestly besides some readings I had to do on my own time, things were great. I liked the idea of me teaching a bit of what I’ve learned so I think I’m going to start doing that at the end of all my posts. Nutritional information is important and I feel like if it helps at least one person, that’s a win to me. Anyways, this week is going to focus on more of the sports side of sports dietetics, we’re gonna be learning about weight management in athletes and adolescent versus child athletes and how they’re needs would be different to adults. It’s a good expansion of what we ended on last week which was body composition and energy balance and tools used to measure it. After this week I’m not sure if NAU being on spring break will affect my interning but if I can keep going expect another post about that, or something about my own studies. Now time for the lesson of the day, body composition. Many people might know this already but the Body Mass Index, used for measuring a person’s mass, is pretty much useless for athletes because of certain needs of their sport. Body mass doesn’t tell you your body composition which is what really is important. What an athlete needs to know is how much of their  body is skeletal muscle and how much is fat compared to their body, height, and bone density. In sports like boxing or throwing events in track, where a body composition is very important, an athlete needs to know where they stand compared to the competition.  This is why simply having a high or low BMI doesn’t help much, muscle is heavier than fat, someone could have a high BMI and be mostly muscle and would be deemed unhealthy based on that BMI alone. This is why sports facilities for elites and college students have ways to measure their body composition and without getting too much in detail are very accurate in seeing what an athlete is really made of. I know this one was geared more for athletics particularly but hope y’all learned something, I’ll be back next week.

---

## March 18-22nd
Diego H - **March 19, 2024 11:33 am**

Back at it, I wanted to do a post last week but the athletes center was closed because of spring break so I literally couldn’t intern. Having a week off was pretty nice though I got to train a bit more for track and get some good sleep. This week is going to be pretty simple because some people are still coming back from break so the bulk of my work is going to be food service. Recently though I got to see what goes into the football mass gainer shakes, and we’ve been getting some access to body composition machines. I haven’t mentioned how cool it is as a runner seeing some of the top people in the nation every day and being able to help them. Nico Young, the top NCAA runner right now won both the national 3 and 5k so I’m assuming there’s going to be a lot of high spirits going around. I expect more work next week but I’ll take an easier week for now. Time for the fun fact, the human body really hates change, much like it maintains body temperature through homeostasis, when dieting or eating more, the body regulates hunger. I’ve heard many times people trying to gain weight get full easy and people trying to lose weight are always hungry. This is because the body wants to maintain a certain weight, when it realizes extra or less energy it regulates hunger levels so the person stays the same weight. This is just one of the many reasons why changing one’s weight is so hard. Definitely not something you do alone it’s good to have help not just with the diet but also mentally. That’s all for this week, hope everyone had a good break. Stay tuned for next week it’s gonna be pretty busy.

---

## Week 25th-29th
Diego H - **March 26, 2024 11:56 am**

Week 5 let’s goooo! Because of a track meet I’m missing our meeting on Friday so that’s unfortunate but I’ve started reading up about our next section for this week to stay caught up. It builds off what we did on adolescent and child athletes last week. This week is college and masters athletes (40+ year olds). It’ll be interesting to see, one, how different adult’s needs are but also the difference between college students and masters. Football is also currently on their “spring ball” season so some interns are going to be helping out with their practice, I most likely will start next week. In general our responsibilities are going to increase but honestly I see that as a good thing, more experience and even cooler, some one-on-one work with athletes. Lesson time, I’ve talked about measuring and what goes into body composition before now I’ll go into why it’s important. So body composition related to your sport is a bit of a spectrum. Some sports require a very lean physique like distance running and others require mass like track throwers. Then there’s the ones the middle where you need a mix of both, sports like this are soccer or sprinters are good examples because yes they need to stay light but also be able to exert high levels of power. The big factors that go into your body are power, agility, endurance, and strength. Based on these criteria and the sport you do, a dietitian will help an athlete reach these goals through their diet. The important part to stress on body comp is that one size never fits all, even in a sport like wrestling where weight matters greatly, two good wrestlers will not be eating the same even in their weight class. There’s a very untrue thought that athletes need to look and eat the same but really what matters is the performance and that’s what a sports dietitian will work with. However, there are some outliers where even an athletes’s body is taken into account for scoring such as gymnastics. This is why working closely with a dietitian  is important because eating disorders can arise very fast for someone who tries to change their body alone. Line men in football for example on average gain about 150lbs between their senior year of high school and senior year of college, but they get there different ways and at different times through weekly meetings and slow increases in calories as they keep training. What I want as a takeaway essentially is that yes, body composition is important in sports, but getting your goals isn’t a sudden change, it requires work with a professional while adjusting your training. Bodies aren’t built the same and when it comes to your nutrition, it’s definitely different for everyone.

---

## April 1st-5th
Diego H - **April 3, 2024 9:50 am**

New week! The second part of my project is starting to ramp up along with the internship. This week I’ve only been able to go to two days and then the meeting on Friday but it’s been busy. One of the days we were stacking the mass gainer shakes to give to football and the amount of crates hauled was crazy, I mean it makes sense…it’s football, but still, so many shakes. This week the focus is on elite athletes and vegetarian athletes. Despite how cool it is to learn about elites I’m more excited about the vegetarian athletes and important food substitutes  they need to still get their macros, micro nutrients, and vitamins. Now for the other half. The other part of my project is making a small nutrition lesson with my internal advisor to teach to some of the middle schoolers. Last week and this Monday we met to start planning, leading up to it we’re going to be meeting on about Mondays to keep working on the lesson and I’ll be meeting with NAU’s dietitian so he can help me with the lesson too. Overall, things are going well and I’m even a bit early in terms of work. Lesson time. I’m going to make this one about something that can help everyone; micronutrients. Now many people focus on the macros of food, carbs, sugars, fats, and proteins, and for good reason, they are crucial to a good diet, however, micronutrients are very, if not just as important, as the macros. There’s your vitamins that help with your skin, immune system, bone health, and even regulate your blood flow. Leafy greens for example are full of vitamin K1 that is essential for helping blood clots, someone in a vitamin k deficiency would find themselves bleeding dramatically even over the smallest scrape. Besides the vitamins there’s also zinc. Zinc is responsible for having a healthy immune system and can be found in meats and especially in many seafoods, salmon is my personal favorite, even if you don’t like seafood though or if your on a vegetarian diet, tofu, nuts, and legumes like beans are packed full of zinc. There are more micros but I could honestly make this an essay if I kept going so I’ll refrain. Macros are important but it’s always good to consider more than just your protein intake, for some post workout tips, besides protein for recovery try having some dried berries or tart cherry juice, the antioxidants help with free radicals in your muscles and keep you less sore for the next day.

---

## April 15th-19th
Diego H - **April 16, 2024 11:25 am**

Last week was brutal. I interned on Monday and the student center was super busy because many sports were around on top of already being busy helping with football’s training. There was definitely much to do but it was nice shadowing their sports dietitian that day, it rarely happens. Tuesday and Wednesday were spent reading up on just more nutrition information, I got into a bit of a spiral reading more about the vegetarian and vegan diet. While I can’t give up meat I definitely have tried to incorporate some vegan foods in my diet for the micronutrients in plants. Big switch is soy milk now being my primary milk source. Thursday through Friday was mostly track related so I didn’t get much done project wise but was still pretty busy. Overall I’m happy that we’re on the new week. The complete opposite is going on this week, the internship I’m doing is a college internship and for the other interns they need a certain number of hours to pass their class, because of this I won’t be going this week so they can reach more hours. There’s still work to be done though, somewhere this week I will be meeting with my internal advisor about the nutrition lesson I’ve been working on, it will be about Carbohydrates, Fats, Proteins, and bit about vitamins and minerals. We’re getting close to when I want to present so I’m excited to finish up. I’ll also be working on my final presentation for basis…full transparency I haven’t started yet I’ve wanted to focus on the lesson for now. Finally, Ill be reading up about diabetes in athletes and nutrition for different kinds of activities. For the lesson today I’ll try to break down a stigma on certain carbs. Before any exercise under 2 hours carbs are friends. White bread or candies are seen as very unhealthy and for the most part they are but, like most things, there’s a balance and an occasional need.  It’s recommended to have some sort of carbohydrate source before exercise and very minimal if not no fats or proteins. Proteins and fats are both very important to have but before exercise can leave you feeling sluggish and low energy because they are digested very slowly. Simple carbs however like jolly ranchers are pure sugar and carbs which is perfect for a pre workout or race boost. They digest very quickly so the energy is absorbed fast. For your post workout meal that’s where the protein should be taken and more carbs to replenish your glycogen stores you lost from working out. Recovery is what makes you better!!

---

## April 22nd-26th
Diego H - **April 23, 2024 11:20 am**

Back at it. As I said last week, there wasn’t too much interning going on and more work on the next part of the project. This week continues this. I finished that lesson that I’ll be doing and yesterday I started showing it to my internal advisor. As I type this blog we’re going to meet again in about 25 minutes to finish up the lesson plan. Starting next week I’ll be teaching this nutrition lesson for 5th-8th graders with Carbohydrates and Fats being on Monday and Proteins and Micronutrients on Thursday. We’ve also been talking about possible adding a mental health side of things for the 8th and maybe even 7th graders but that’s still tbd honestly. I’ve started my final presentation, it won’t be done till next Thursday the earliest because I want to include my experience teaching the lesson but I’m happy it’s gotten started. Not much interning again this week so I have time to do these other things but we do have a meeting on Friday that I’ll be going to. I’m pretty sure after this week that’ll be it for the internship it’s a bit bittersweet. For the lesson itself I’m feeling nervous, presentations are doable but teaching feels so pressuring for some reason, I hope I can come across knowledgeable without being annoying. I also hope I don’t bore the classes so I got to find ways to make it engaging…something I’ll also talk about during my meeting soon. For the lesson today I’ll talk about the mental side of healthy eating. When eating healthy, it has to be a habit you’re going to do the rest of your life. It’s not as simple as achieving a certain weight or performance goal and then going back. Healthy eating is sustainable and that’s where most people fail. Having a strict diet leaves room for failure in any goal, willpower and brief motivation only lasts for so long. When truly trying to eat right it’s important to see how much you’re actually enjoying your diet. Just because it’s “healthy” doesn’t mean you can’t make interesting foods that taste good and, in the end, as long as it’s all in moderation I wouldn’t even say no completely to treats every now and then. It’s so much better for you then going in and out of a diet you hate and seeing little progress. Consistency is what matters and as long as you’re happy with the diet, it makes a huge difference for longevity.